So welcome back, guys.
Now, in this lecture, we will be going to discuss the concept of shared physical pages.
A shared physical page is a physical page, which is shared by two or more running processes on the
system, a physical page is set to be shared if it is present in page tables of two or more than two
processes.
So concept of shared physical page actually allows multiple processes running on the system to read
and write into the same physical memory portion.
We will see how concept of shared physical pages makes this possible.
So let us start to understand the concept of shared physical pages with the help of an example.
So, for example, we will continue with the same configuration of the system which we discussed while
discussing the concept of paging.
So following is the configuration of the system.
It is the same configuration which were discussed before.
So you can see that the virtual address comprises all four bits and it is decomposed into two parts
of two bits each.
So please go through this configuration once again.
Now, you must be familiar what exactly this configuration means and what is the information you can
infer from this configuration?
So going forward, so in our example, we have two processes that is process P1 and P2 running simultaneously
on the system.
On the right hand side is the snapshot of the physical memory and as part the configuration.
Physical memory is fragmented into eight frames.
And of course, the size of each frame is four bytes.
Now, consider following is the snapshot of the peace tables of the two processes, you can see that
there is a slight modification in the page tables of the two process.
You can see that there is a physical page, right, corresponding to the virtual page two in the page
stable of process one.
Similarly, there is the same physical page write corresponding to the virtual page number three in
the table of process two.
So it means that there is same physical page entry in the table of the two processes.
And of course, this physical page why is loaded in frame number one, that as you can see that in this
frame, number one of physical memory, the physical page Y is loaded.
So now the question is that how can you insert the same physical page into the page tables of multiple
process now put Linux or Unix operating system allows that using a special system called called a map,
we will discuss the design and concept behind this system call.
But for now, just understand that we have a physical page entry present in the table of the process.
Now suppose the process P1 during the course of its execution generates a virtual address one zero zero
one, which is actually nine.
Right.
And process P2 during the course of its execution generates a virtual address 13 whose binary equivalent
is one one zero one.
Now, we know that the composition of this virtual address is to buy two seats.
So first of bytes are used to locate the virtual page, no underpaid, stable.
So you can see that all that was generated by the process BE1 maps to the virtual page number two and
this virtual page number two, maps to the physical space number Y, which is loaded in frame one and
physical memory.
Similarly, in case of process, prior to the first two bits of virtual address maps to the virtual
page number three in the peace table, which maps to the physical space number y loaded and frame one
in physical memory.
So the output of look up into the page tables of the true process using the first two bits of virtual
address is frame one.
Now, the second part of the virtual address is zero one in case of process B one.
And the second part of what that does is, again, zero one in case of process P2.
Now we know that the second part of the virtual address represents an offset, right?
So the offset is one.
So you can see that the virtual address nine and what that 13 generated by the process be one and people
maps to the physical address, five in the main memory.
Now, you already know how Beijing works, so you know the science behind how we reach to the physical
address five of main memory so you can see that process be won by generating a virtual does nine maps
to the physical Atlas five and process petabytes and rating of plus 13 again, maps to the same physical
Atlas five in the main memory.
So what does that mean?
It simply means that process P1 and P2 are accessing the same physical memory location whose address
is five.
It simply means that whatever be won right at physical, at those five modification will be available
to process, but also it simply means that process be won and people are sharing the same physical memory
page in frame F1, subframe F1 is that portion of that physical memory which the process we want and
people can read and write simultaneously.
So if Process B one executes the following statement, right, so at that does nine, process B, one
is writing a string of land for.
Now, after the execution of this statement, if process be to execute the following statement in which
the SDR is a pointer which points to the that address 13 of process, Pitou, then the output of this
print statement will be held.
That is the same string which was written by the process P1.
So it simply means that whatever modification the process B one does in physical pays, no Y which is
loaded in frame F one, those modifications will be available to the process.
But also so in a way, you can see that process.
P1 and P2 are actually exchanging data with each other using the concept of shared physical memory.
So now let us try to look at the broader perspective that what we have actually achieved by inserting
the same physical page, which is based numberi in the past table of multiple processes.
So going forward in this diagram you can see that we have three processes running simultaneously on
the system and we have some physical page RHI, which is loaded in the best table of all these three
processes.
So if processed P1 right.
And the content or data in this physical memory, the modification that is done by the process, P1
will be available or visible to both the processes, P2 and P3.
So it means that BE1 is able to communicate its data to process people and process Putri using shared
memory region.
Similarly, a process to write anything in this region than those modifications will be available to
the process P1 and process Putri also.
So this is the shared memory and goal by loading a same physical page into page tables of multiple processes,
we have actually achieved a mechanism to facilitate data exchange between the processes running on the
same system.
This mechanism of data exchange between processors running on the same machine is formally called as
the entire process communication through shared memory.
So now let us have a summary on shared pages.
So if virtual page of multiple process maps to the same physical page, that particular physical page
is shared by multiple processors, Linux or Unix operating system officially calls this concept as shared
memory.
Social memory is one of the enterprises communication technique that is supported by Linux or Unix like
operating system.
Linux or Unix like operating system provides a system called and I have already told you that that system
call is AMAP, right?
We will discuss the science behind the system called later in discourse.
So Linux operating system provide a system called which allow multiple process to create shared memory
region and exchange data through it.
So we have learned the concept behind shared memory.
We shall learned later how to write programs which would support data exchange with multiple processors
running on the same machine using shared memory.